Michael Franz: Hello everybody and welcome to Week seven or at least the end of week seven or the middle of Week seven depending on when you're listening to this and
Michael Franz: Coming back after Fall break we're moving into ESSENTIALLY, TWO WEEKS OF DISCUSSION AROUND exit polling and I'm sorry polling and an exit polling. So the broader enterprise of serving voters in a
Michael Franz: In a constituency in a geographic area state or a congressional district and I want to walk us through what I call some of the nuts and bolts of
Michael Franz: Polling the the opportunities and the challenges, some of which was raised in the article for today by sunshine Hill August, but also
Michael Franz: Doesn't get a necessarily a full and lengthy description. And so I want to walk us through some of these
Michael Franz: Some of these challenges. Some of these opportunities, show us some analysis from previous elections and and lay out what I think of the key features to look at in a in a poll, or in a set of polls.
Michael Franz: So let me share my screen to bring up this PowerPoint presentation and then I'll excuse me all alum.
Michael Franz: Play the presentation and
Michael Franz: The title of it is, sort of, you know, not super important. But, you know, can political polling be trusted is really the underlying question and
Michael Franz: I'm going to be talking about some nuts and bolts, as I said, and there's a lot of interesting ways to think about polling.
Michael Franz: But one of the things I want to start with is, well, one is this cartoon maybe gets to my final point or today, which is that we can spend
Michael Franz: A lot of time talking about the mechanics of pole collection data collection. But then at the end of the day. There's also the questions we asked and those need to be
Michael Franz: Those needs to be good ones. And then we can ask bad questions or vague questions and then the results we get back are not very helpful at all.
Michael Franz: But the first thing I want to point out is that polling can be a very valuable and important.
Michael Franz: Resource I called it in the module, the structure of the module. And one of my sections that a prime set of primary documents in the history of
Michael Franz: American elections and if you look at this graph, which I'll explain you get a sense of, of the awesome
Michael Franz: capacities of polling and combining and looking at pulls over time. These are Gallup polls Gallup has been in the industry for
Michael Franz: 70 more than 70 years and has been consistently pulling Americans asking the same questions they asked lots of different questions and lots of different polls, but they asked a lot of the same questions over time. And so we have decades and decades and decades of polling data.
Michael Franz: These are aggregated for us by pollster calm, which the article mentions as one of the polling aggregators they're no longer an operation. And so you'll see that this time series ends in 2017
Michael Franz: We don't have updated data as easily accessible from polling aggregators
Michael Franz: Real Clear Politics and and 538 to aggregate poles for us. They didn't split them out as easily as pollster did pulsar.com is still a websites, you can go take a look at it. But they don't update their data anymore.
Michael Franz: These data that underlie this graph still exist past 2017 but they're just not easily sortable in the way that I'll describe to you.
Michael Franz: And that's one of the challenges of the excessive amounts of polling, we have today is finding good ways to archive these data and make them available.
Michael Franz: To us, but when we had this sort of Time series open to us back to 1948 Gallup has been asking about presidential approval for for for this length of time.
Michael Franz: And they can split the responses into whether or not the party of the responded the party identification of the responded matches the party of President
Michael Franz: And so the bold line there is what what I call own partisans which is the President's members of the President's party and approval ratings of those respondents of the President.
Michael Franz: Which you'll bounced all around. But generally, hover around 75% approval rating can go much below that, but can also go much above that.
Michael Franz: And but as always higher than out partisans those would be members of the other party. So in the case of Ronald Reagan out partisans would be Democrats democratic respondents in the poll
Michael Franz: And when Brock Obama was president out partisans would be republicans and this is the approval rating of the president by out partisans as well, which
Michael Franz: bounces around a lot as well can go way up in the case of right after 911 when everybody approved of George W. Bush.
Michael Franz: But can also go way down to below 10% especially. More recently, and so the reason why I say polling is very valuable is because
Michael Franz: One of the things we can see is the intense polarization that exists today from roughly the time that brock obama was inaugurated in this first part of 2009 Republicans had a brief moment of
Michael Franz: Approving him at greater than 25% those numbers have plummeted to 10% or even less well own partisans don't have historic approval of their
Michael Franz: Of the President in their party but have pretty high approval. And in fact, the difference between own partisans and out partisans in the last 12 years or 10 years or so in this graph.
Michael Franz: Is greater than at any time in the history of the polling that Gallup has done.
Michael Franz: And so the polarization between parties amongst Members of the electorate and how they evaluate the president is at historic highs and we can tell that from this graph.
Michael Franz: Now that also means that this is one of the benefits of polling. It's one of the advantages of of being able to ask similar questions of respondents across many years of data.
Michael Franz: Polling is also very valuable because it can tell us about trends in a race. This is Clinton versus Trump and 2016 we've seen some of this data before from the Identity Politics book and
Michael Franz: It aggregates all the polls that asked about the head to head Trump versus Clinton battle in 2016 all the way back to when pollsters started asking about Clinton versus Trump
Michael Franz: Soon after Trump was a declared candidate some pollsters asked, well, if Trump were to be the nominee, who would you vote for. And so anything above zero shows Clinton getting a higher support amongst the population than Trump
Michael Franz: And the black line is a sort of what we call a Lois fit, which is a sort of line that allows the trend kind of finds the mean of the trend.
Michael Franz: As you move along time. Now this is a form of polling aggregation.
Michael Franz: And you want to look in the article about how she describes polling ALEC aggregation because I'm not looking at one poll. I'm looking at a summary measure of all the polls. But this black line doesn't actually account for
Michael Franz: Various features of the polls itself. It doesn't account for sample size doesn't account for the type of poll being conducted with the type of population being surveyed
Michael Franz: It just looks at all the polls and basically takes the moving average.
Michael Franz: There's certain advantages of doing that as a hilarious points out, and then there are certain challenges of doing that kind of aggregation is as his biggest points out,
Michael Franz: But even taking a very, very simple moving average of these polls over time. You can see that Clinton had a consistently throughout the entire campaign. When polls asked about a head to head matchup between the two. But that at the end, the campaign moved
Michael Franz: Towards Trump but ended at a rest of the final black.on this line here is pretty darn close to the green dot, which is the actual national popular vote result.
Michael Franz: And so even though at the end of the campaign, there was movement towards Trump which identity politics tells us may have been the consequence of the Kony letter or maybe not or access hollywood tapes or
Michael Franz: The debates, there was some movement towards Trump at the very end, but all the polls generally predicted that Clinton still would win the national popular vote.
Michael Franz: She did. And the very simple moving average fit to this line predicts the outcome. And just a little bit higher than the 2% win that she got the national popular vote.
Michael Franz: So in that sense, the national polling was pretty accurate in 2016
Michael Franz: That's taking into account a lot of variation here in this plot, you can see some polls had Trump winning samples that Trump winning this far back. But if we wait them.
Michael Franz: And look at the moving average, we see that on average Clinton had a consistent lead
Michael Franz: That's the advantage of polling aggregation. We don't focus on one poll or two poles, we allow all the polls to contribute to an inference that we make about the state of the race.
Michael Franz: But let's not get too carried away here because polls can get things wrong. And in fact, at the state level, as we know from the discussion and identity crisis.
Michael Franz: This is where they tended to get things a little bit wrong now not dramatically wrong but wrong enough to predict the outcome wrong. And so these are the polls in the state of Wisconsin.
Michael Franz: And there are fewer polls in the state of Wisconsin. As you can see from the previous graph. There's just not as much effort put into state level polling, as there is national polling.
Michael Franz: But early on in the campaign Clinton was absolutely far ahead of Trump, but over the course of the entire campaign primary into the general election. You can see that the race types. And in fact,
Michael Franz: All of the polls suggests, or most of the polls suggest movement towards very competitive racing in Wisconsin.
Michael Franz: Some of the final polls in the state over here predicted a Clinton when in Wisconsin by a couple of points, but all of the polls are above the zero line on this axis here, which means that all of the polls predicted the point estimate anyway predicted that Clinton would win the state.
Michael Franz: Here's the final result which is that Trump won the state. And so in reality the polls were wrong. They were off, I should say they didn't predict the outcome correctly. Even the final polls, which showed a more competitive race that had been the case in the summer of
Michael Franz: Of 2016 all tended to think that Clinton was likely to win the state of Wisconsin. So the polls ran into a problem in in 2016 at the state level.
Michael Franz: But that may not have been a polling problem that may have been
Michael Franz: A problem of picking up late movement in voters decisions. So, for example, these are, this is a graph from exit poll data. And so we'll talk about exit polls next week.
Michael Franz: But the exit polls are administered in many of the key states, not every state, but in many of the key states and they're conducted at the polling places and increasingly the exit poll does some PRE ELECTION telephone poles.
Michael Franz: But it's an assessment of who people voted for and and why they voted the way they did. So these data are aggregated to the state level.
Michael Franz: And you have the state of Wisconsin highlighted up here and it shows on the X axis, the percentage of people in the exit poll. Who said they made the decision of who they were going to vote for
Michael Franz: In the final week of the campaign. So who waited till the very, very end to decide who they were going to vote for
Michael Franz: And in Wisconsin anyway about 15% of people who took the exit poll. So a pretty what we would refer as a
Michael Franz: Rough percent of the populate voting population who decided late about 15% and it shows the Trump lead in the final declared vote of those voters over Clinton.
Michael Franz: And you can see that in Wisconsin. Anyway, the undecided voters. Those who broke who'd made up their mind at the very end.
Michael Franz: Tended to favor Trump by a lot. And that's a trump minus Clinton margin would say that the balance of people prefer Trump over Clinton.
Michael Franz: In Wisconsin among the people who made their decision late, which was about 15% of the electorate.
Michael Franz: So in this graph up here before you know we have undecideds that are not included in the graph. It's Clinton lead over Trump. So the percentage of people who would vote for Clinton.
Michael Franz: Minus the percentage of people who would vote for Trump, and we assume that the undecided voters will break about evenly, since they're undecided. They're probably a flip a coin.
Michael Franz: But in fact in Wisconsin, as in many other states the Wisconsin voters who decided they didn't flip a coin, they voted disproportionately for Trump.
Michael Franz: And so the polls wouldn't pick that late movement up and so, to some extent, it's possible that the results in Wisconsin. We're not mistakes of the pollsters
Michael Franz: Although we'll see some evidence of possible mistakes in a minute. But I've just late movement towards Trump that helped him win those states.
Michael Franz: And that's important, important to keep in mind is that if a poll is conducted with three or four days left in the campaign and there's still five or 6% undecided.
Michael Franz: In that race, if they break one way or the other, they'll typically race one direction or the other. And even though most people have already made up their mind. Not everybody has. And in a close race that can make a big difference.
Michael Franz: And give you another example. This is in the context of the UK and the vote on Brexit. These are all the polls conducted by various organizations collected by the BBC.
Michael Franz: To get a sense of where voters were on the Brexit issue, which was a referendum in the country. In the summer of 2016
Michael Franz: And so this is the percent who would vote to leave the EU minus the percent who would vote to remain in the EU.
Michael Franz: The final tally was to leave, which is created a whole series of problems for the country in the last number of years by about a couple points, but you can see that most of the polls over time predicted that or at least the moving average predicted that a large number of voters or
Michael Franz: Advanced majority of the voters favored remain. Now there was some late movement towards the leaf side of things, but the final result. Using this moving average.
Michael Franz: Predicted even though there was some polls above zero, but the moving average simple moving average would predict.
Michael Franz: That the UK would vote to remain in the EU, and it didn't it voted to leave. And so this was also considered to be a bit of a polling failure, a difference in the sort of final weighted sort of aggregation against the result.
Michael Franz: But we also have a an issue with undecideds here as well. This just shows in the same set of polls the percentage of voters who said at the time they were pulled
Michael Franz: That they are undecided. And so for each of these polls, which is a great dot. You can see that in this sort of moving average.
Michael Franz: Somewhere between 15 and 20% sometimes a lot higher of respondents were undecided on the issue of
Michael Franz: Leave versus remain and that number have dropped a bit by the end of the campaign. But even at the very end, on average, the polls show that about one in 10 voters didn't know what they were going to do when they went in and voted.
Michael Franz: And again, maybe one in 10 of those voters is enough to move the result from the poll which was just looking at 2% that's a remain minus the percent that say leave in the direction of leave the EU and so
Michael Franz: We have to keep in mind undecideds we often assume that they don't exist anymore or that they will break evenly between the two options that they have. But that's not always it's not always the case.
Michael Franz: So I want to talk about what I think are the main features of polling, the things we need to take stock of
Michael Franz: And walk us through some of those some of those challenges. The first is going to be the mode of the poll. Which is sort of how it's conducted. Is it a telephone pole or an interface poll
Michael Franz: How we could select our samples, how many people we interview response rates. How many people refuse to take our poll
Michael Franz: We can wait. The results on the back end to try to make the demographics of the pole reflect the underlying population.
Michael Franz: Not all pollsters do the same thing, the same way. And so we have what are called sponsor effects or what the article calls house effects.
Michael Franz: And then, of course, to go back to that cartoon. We have the question wording problem which is we need to ask good questions in order to get good data.
Michael Franz: So what about mode well mode is how we conduct the pole and the best polls are conducted by telephone, those are telephone poles.
Michael Franz: And that's because that's a good way of reaching all voters in fact all of us have phones.
Michael Franz: It wasn't always the case that all households or headphones back in the 50s and 60s, especially in rural areas, but everyone today has a phone or has access to a phone. And so to reach everybody we can do with
Michael Franz: With calling them. We don't have a list of all voters an easy accessible list of all voters, more or less, are all adults pulsars don't have those pieces of information. So we can't sample from
Michael Franz: A list like we would if we had a list of all Bowden students. I could sample 500 names from the list of bonus students that whatever random sample of students.
Michael Franz: We don't have a list of all adults in the United States. And so we can't sample from the list, but we can sample from telephone numbers.
Michael Franz: Which are broadly accessible to everybody. And we do that by sampling from area codes which will give us areas of the country that we can sample from
Michael Franz: The prefix, which is the first three digits and telephone number, which the telephone companies to sign some prefixes to businesses and some prefixes to
Michael Franz: Residences and we know what those are. And so we can sample from residential prefixes. So we have a random sample of areas.
Michael Franz: A random sample random sample of residential phone lines.
Michael Franz: And then the line number is just a random set of numbers that the phone company produces. And so we can randomly sample four digit numbers. And if we do that, we give everybody a chance to be in the poll which is important to get a good random sample.
Michael Franz: Now, back in the old days, the golden era as I would call it, which was maybe the 80s. Every, every house generally had a phone. The vast majority of houses had only one and
Michael Franz: And people tended to answer the phone. Well that started to change pretty quickly, many households got more than one landline
Michael Franz: And people started to get cell phones now that changes how accessible. People are if you're older and you live in a house with just one old fashioned telephone line.
Michael Franz: You have that chance of being sampled
Michael Franz: If you're a younger person who lives at home, where there's a landline or two in your house and you have a cell phone, you might have way more chances to get sampled
Michael Franz: Under this process of sampling phone numbers. So that makes you more likely to be pulled than an older person. And that's not good in terms of collecting a random sample of people
Michael Franz: So the gold standard was this sort of perhaps the 70s and 80s when phones were accessible not widely distributed, at least not overwhelmingly the case that people had more phones than homes.
Michael Franz: But now we're in a different world. In particular, the role of cell phones. Some pollsters do not sample from cell phone numbers because for lots of reasons.
Michael Franz: They're harder to get a list of those cell phone numbers and
Michael Franz: The law requires that cell phone polling a polling of people with cell phones, be done by live interviewers, and so if you're a pollster, who wants to sample cell phones.
Michael Franz: You have to hire people to make the phone calls. Many pollsters have switched to what they call it VR polling, which is essentially
Michael Franz: The computer randomly calls you and you are prompted to answer questions by pressing one, two or three on your phone and you never talk to a person
Michael Franz: But that can only be done for landlines to hire people to make those phone calls makes administering the pole more costly.
Michael Franz: And so if we want to include cell phones, we need to hire people to do that pay them taxes pay them, you know, all sorts of, you know, all sorts of
Michael Franz: Things that come with hiring contract work.
Michael Franz: I can also raise the cost of the pole. As a result,
Michael Franz: But we have to include cell phones if we want to reach the population. And this is an old graph from Pew Research Center that goes back seven years. And so imagine where it would be today.
Michael Franz: That looks at the percentage of adults in various categories that are in cell phone only households. I'm in a cell phone only household. We don't have a landline in my house and that's increasingly popular
Michael Franz: And it varies across age groups and poverty status. And so if I don't put cell phone numbers in my poll
Michael Franz: I will be missing disproportionately large segments of the population increasingly
Michael Franz: And so if I want to sample by telephone, I have to put cell phone numbers in my sample which means I have to use a polling company that employs individuals to make those calls. Now, make it more expensive.
Michael Franz: The other problem with cell phones is that they're transferable as you move. And so, it used to be the case.
Michael Franz: With area codes that if I randomly call the 207 number I would reach a household in me. So if I wanted a sample main voters, I would only use 207 numbers.
Michael Franz: Well, nowadays people move and they don't change their phone number. So I might sample cell phones with 207 area codes and I might get people who no longer live in the state of Maine.
Michael Franz: And that makes it more costly because now I need to call another number to try to replace that sample person with a new sample person.
Michael Franz: And so, cell phone coverage and the movement mobility of voters with those numbers makes it harder to assume that area codes are actually tied to geographic areas.
Michael Franz: This is a big problem. This is a big problem. So what folks have tended to do is switch to internet based polling.
Michael Franz: Now this is not the internet based poll and you might see on the Drudge Report or on CNN where you're asked to say who won the debate.
Michael Franz: This is a an attempt to try to reproduce random sampling, but using the internet. Now that's hard to do because we don't have a list of emails that we can just sample from
Michael Franz: But what we can do is try to build a large panel of people who are interested in participating in online polls. The most commonly used.
Michael Franz: Vendor for this is a company called you Gov. And you can look them up if you like. You gov works as follows. If you sign up and you can sign up, you will become a member of you. GOV who will be sampled on occasion to take a poll
Michael Franz: Why would you do that. Well, you would do that one right because you're interested in taking polls, but also in taking polls, you can earn points.
Michael Franz: And those points can be used to redeem them for gift cards or for airline miles or for other sorts of things. So you gain a benefit by contributing to these polls.
Michael Franz: You go tries to get as many people as they possibly can to select into their sample and they claim to have over a million people who are in their sample.
Michael Franz: Then they sample from the panel. Let's say there's a million people in their category of panelists. They sample randomly from those individuals, which all of which provide an email address too much to be contacted and they administer the poll to the sample from the panel.
Michael Franz: That makes it look kind of analogous to a random sample of voters. It's just a random sample of panelists. This is good. If the panel is really big because
Michael Franz: There's a lot of people in there to sample from maybe millions, but it is not the same as sampling from the underlying population of all voters. It's sampling from a population of panelists, which is used to sort of stand in, if you will, for the broader population.
Michael Franz: But it's creative and it allows
Michael Franz: People to administer polls more quickly internet based polling can go faster. It can get responses more quickly because people tend to respond to these emails, especially when they're earning points.
Michael Franz: They don't tend to answer their phone anymore. And that makes it harder to call people on the phone.
Michael Franz: And so internet based polling has really become much more popular and you'll see in the polling aggregations especially with 538 that you Gov. Is there quite a bit. Now the other advantage of internet polls.
Michael Franz: Is supposedly. It allows people to answer more accurately.
Michael Franz: Supposedly, because when you're answering an internet based poll, you're not actually talking to a human being. And so you don't feel pressure to conform to certain social norms.
Michael Franz: You can say what you really believe if you're a racist, you can express those racial views, but if you're talking to someone on the phone. Oftentimes, people have
Michael Franz: hesitancy and in making known that they hold prejudicial views they hold them secretly or only reveal them selectively to friends and family members.
Michael Franz: But on an online poll. There's nobody listening to your answers. You can just click the box as you want. And this was seen as a possible way of picking up
Michael Franz: Support for Brexit amongst maybe UK voters who are afraid to admit they want to leave the EU.
Michael Franz: And there's also a tendency for some folks to think that there's a shy Trump voter people who are afraid to admit they vote for Trump, because of his
Michael Franz: brashness but who will admit it on an internet based poll so we can kind of look for that and test for that by comparing polls across modes.
Michael Franz: Here's the Brexit results. The percent who say leave versus the percent who say remain in dark, the black ones are online based polls and you can see how prevalent and important they are to British politics, they're much more frequent today in British politics than telephone based polls.
Michael Franz: Excuse me, but the internet based polls tended to predict a much closer race in the Brexit vote than the telephone poles. Did the telephone poles picked up late movement towards the leaf position.
Michael Franz: But the internet based polls tended to maybe more accurately reflect that percentages of British voters wanted to leave the EU and in fact the moving average of the final
Michael Franz: online polls of Brexit tended to be closer to the moving average of the final telephone based polls and predicted a leave vote instead of romaine boat. And so, to some extent, the online polls are a bit more accurate than the telephone baseball's
Michael Franz: What about the shy Trump voter here. I've done a little slight of hand for you, which is I've taken the internet polls and now made them gray.
Michael Franz: And the telephone poles made them black I should keep things consistent, but I didn't. So I apologize for that. Here you can see the clinton lead over Trump over time against the
Michael Franz: Against the time and then split by the mode of the pole internet versus live telephone calls
Michael Franz: And you can see here that, well, there's not a tremendous amount of evidence here for shy Trump voters in fact the internet based polls the moving average of internet based polls.
Michael Franz: Tended to predict a higher Clinton lead than she actually got and it was the telephone poles that predicted a closer race.
Michael Franz: And so if the shy Trump voters were only expressing support for Trump in the internet polls, then that shouldn't be the case in this graph, but the the numbers track pretty closely, there's a bit of a gap here in
Michael Franz: The very end. This is from September of 2016 till November. So the very final two months, there's a bit of a gap here in October of 2016 that doesn't isn't as big as the other parts of the fall campaign, but by and large they track pretty well together and
Michael Franz: The final moving average point on these graphs predicts Clinton winning the popular vote in both cases.
Michael Franz: So I don't know much about a shy Trump drone photo effect. In fact, subsequent research hasn't much found any evidence for that.
Michael Franz: But that was one of the hypotheses about the advantages of doing internet based polls. So we definitely want to take account of mode issues and find out whether a poll is conducted online versus conducted
Michael Franz: by phone. The second issue a sample selection, typically with political polls were interested in one of three categories all adults, which is easy. We asked a respond. And if there are over the age of 18
Michael Franz: registered voters, which is also pretty easy. We asked voters if they're registered to vote.
Michael Franz: But we might be most interested in likely voters, which is people who claim that they are likely to vote and we leave out the people who claim that they're unlikely to vote.
Michael Franz: Because of their I'm likely to vote, then we don't want them to influence the prediction of who will win the election because they're not going to vote.
Michael Franz: So we're only interested in the people who say they're likely to vote. But what is a likely voter analogous talks about this is operationalize differently across different surveys
Michael Franz: We could just ask people how likely are you to vote and then only include in our results. People who say that they are definitely likely to vote.
Michael Franz: But what about people who say they will probably vote should they be included in the category of likely voter and how the results change if we define likely voter in different ways. That's kind of a conceptual
Michael Franz: Challenge for pollsters it does matter a little bit in the results. This is a what we call a box plot of
Michael Franz: Support for the Democrats or Republicans in who should control the US House in 2016
Michael Franz: It's called the generic congressional balance. So we oftentimes ask pull people off. Oftentimes asked, Who do you want to be in charge of the US House Democrats or Republicans sort of a generic question.
Michael Franz: Well, if you ask likely voters. The line here in this box is the median of all the polls. So this is another way to aggregate polling results. Not looking across time, but sort of lumping them all into one.
Michael Franz: Bucket amongst likely voters. The median support for Democrats is about 40% the median support for Republicans, a little bit less than that. And so the lead on average the median lead
Michael Franz: between Democrats and Republicans in the likely voters is pretty close but amongst registered voters democrats are far more preferred to Republicans, then
Michael Franz: Then in the likely voter set. And so looking at registered voters would suggest that Democrats are doing really well. Looking at likely voters suggest there's
Michael Franz: Almost a split of support between Democrats and Republicans over who should control the House.
Michael Franz: And so looking at likely voters versus looking at registered voters will give us different sets of results.
Michael Franz: You'll see that in 538 and Real Clear Politics some polls are polls have what they call lbs likely voters and some polls are of Arby's registered voters and so we just need to know and pay attention to that.
Michael Franz: The third issue is sample size. In short, more data is better. We want more data. But there's an interesting, interesting decision or interesting consequence of that.
Michael Franz: You've heard about margins of error, where a poll says
Michael Franz: Clinton is beating Trump or Biden is beating Trump by four points plus or minus three that margin of error gives us a sense of how certain we are in the results and it's purely a function. Well, it's almost purely a function of sample size.
Michael Franz: It's also a function of the proportions, but sample sizes key. And so when you have a small sample your uncertainty is pretty large. You only asked 10 people we don't really know how well a reflection. Is that a
Michael Franz: broader public. But if we ask 1000 people the sample size starts to drop and it drops really fast from 10 people up to 1000 people
Michael Franz: But what you're saying about sample sizes. It doesn't get much smaller when you move from 2000 to 3000 or from 5000 to 6000
Michael Franz: it bottoms out at you know maybe one or two points because we never know the truth, for sure, but it doesn't get much better. Once you get past 1000
Michael Franz: And so most polls will be of 1000 people maybe 500 or 750 because it's expensive to pull people and because if I doubled my budget and tried to increase my pole from 1000 to 2000 my margins of error would not get
Michael Franz: Double the small and so that's why most polls tend to cluster in the thousand range.
Michael Franz: So sample sizes and point you want to pay attention to sample size. If you see a poll conducted in your race with a sample size of around 200
Michael Franz: You know, you want to be some suspicious of that because the margin of error is going to be a lot bigger than if it was 1000 that's where the movement really is in the margin of error.
Michael Franz: response rates are increasingly important, because they're increasingly bad response rates are
Michael Franz: A huge problem for us. These days, when we conduct polls fewer and fewer people want to answer their phone. And so you can look at this, but looking at some data between 1997 and 2012
Michael Franz: The response rate is the percent of households who are sampled that yield in an interview. There's a percent of households where someone was reached, which is the contact rate.
Michael Franz: The percentage of households that contacted the yield interview. So a subset of those and then the response rate is the final number of people called that actually produced a survey.
Michael Franz: And in 1997 the response rate was about 36% of people sampled. But in 2012 the response rate for Pew surveys was only 9% which means that only one in 10 people that were sampled
Michael Franz: yielded an interview. So if you want 1000 person survey in order to get that good margin of error around 3%
Michael Franz: You need to interview or you need to sample 10,000 phone numbers that's 10,000 phone calls.
Michael Franz: To get 1000 interviews. Now we don't just give up when somebody doesn't answer the phone. We usually call them three, four or five times before we give up.
Michael Franz: So imagine you had to do that for every one of those 10,000 households. Now you've made 50,000 phone calls to get 1000 responses. If you're using cell phones you need live interviewers doing those phone calls. So you can imagine how costly things can get pretty quickly.
Michael Franz: Now, not all send surveys have response rates that are 9%. Some have my response rates that are much higher. This is from the Economist
Michael Franz: That shows the current population survey the General Social Survey, a variety of very commonly done surveys across time.
Michael Franz: And response rates here are much higher and the current population survey is bit of a pest. They will track you down and make you fill out that survey.
Michael Franz: They work for the census. So they are pretty good at tracking you down and they get
Michael Franz: Pretty good response rates General Social Survey the consumer expenditures survey, they, they work really hard to get people to fill out their surveys. They don't give up very easily.
Michael Franz: But response rates are still going down in all these cases, and that's a concern for us because it's expensive to get people to fill out surveys
Michael Franz: And another reason why internet based polling is becoming more frequent because
Michael Franz: Especially with you have all of the people they're sampling from are people who have said to you go, Yes, I want to take your polls, send them to me.
Michael Franz: And I will get an earn points in filling them out and so response rates are through the roof for you. GOV because they're already sampling from a set of willing participants.
Michael Franz: So if you're not going to use. You go and you want to use a telephone pole beware response rates are going to be really been a bit of a challenge.
Michael Franz: Now waiting is more complex and I'm not going to go through much detail on waiting. But the short of it is that the responses we get back
Michael Franz: Don't often look like the distribution of the electorate. So when we do a random sample of people, as long as people randomly say yes or randomly say no to taking our survey, then it's not a huge deal that we don't get
Michael Franz: That you know that response rates are low, but what if older people are more likely to say yes and younger people are more likely to say no.
Michael Franz: When they're asked to fill out a survey. Well then, older people would be over represented in the survey and younger people would be under represented
Michael Franz: In the survey. Once we have our set of responses. That's bad because older people and younger people have different political views.
Michael Franz: So we can wait things which is to count those older respondents, a little bit less and to count those younger respondents a little bit more and try to balance it out to the
Michael Franz: underlying population distribution across age.
Michael Franz: You can see that here in this graph, which uses the current population survey to look at the difference between the share of eligible voters and the share of actual voters in the 2012 election.
Michael Franz: And this makes sense to us the black dots, show us the share of actual voters so 20% of the voting, pop, pop, public in 2012 was 55 to 64
Michael Franz: However, the white.is the share of eligible voters, they're less of a share of eligible voters more of a share of actual voters and so these older voters are over represented amongst the electorate.
Michael Franz: And younger voters who make up you know 13% of actual eligible voters showed up at lower than 10%
Michael Franz: Or made up. I should say about 9% eight and a half percent of the voting public in 2012 so they are under represented in the share of actual voters. Well, we can get the same set of results with polls. And so what we can do is count.
Michael Franz: The people here in this
Michael Franz: blacked out we can count them more to make them wait up to this number and we can under count these folks, essentially, instead of counting everybody in the poll is one person we can count them as
Michael Franz: 1.2 people and we can count them as point eight people and make them count less in the set of final results. It's like a weighted average weighted by the population distribution across these different demographic groups.
Michael Franz: Waiting is something that pollsters will do in order to kind of even things out when they get a set of respondents. That doesn't look very much like
Michael Franz: The population. They're trying to make inferences about but what await is is a decision by a pollster to fudge the numbers. And that's always a bit of a bit of a concern.
Michael Franz: Perhaps the fact that pollsters did not fudge the numbers was something to do with the polling mistakes in 2016 and that's because it may have been the case that
Michael Franz: In line with identity crisis working class white voters non college educated white voters may have been disproportionately less likely to
Michael Franz: To answer the phone or to take a survey in 2016 and as a result they were not accurately reflected in the set of polling results.
Michael Franz: If they weren't then the polls would undercount Trump's support in that state which is generally what happened.
Michael Franz: And so this is a graph again from the economist that looks at the percent across states of voting eligible population that are lights with no college education and there's a similar graph to this.
Michael Franz: In identity crisis and it shows that there are some states that have very high share of voting eligible voters voting eligible population that are these working class white voters, the x and y axis shows us how good or bad. The poll was relative to the outcome of the election.
Michael Franz: In this case numbers that are greater than zero underestimated Trump's support.
Michael Franz: And lo and behold, there's a pretty good relationship between how much a state has working class white voters and how under representative, the poll was of trumps support.
Michael Franz: And in places with a lot of working class white voters. The polls were more wrong. And so it could have been the case that there was a response bias in the poll
Michael Franz: We're working class whites did not take the polls at high enough rates to be included and reflect their support for Trump.
Michael Franz: If pollsters knowingness or waited on that they might have emphasized or added more to the poll Trump's support from the working class white voters who did take the survey, but pollsters oftentimes don't wait on things like education and so they may have missed
Michael Franz: That in the poll result. Now that we've been told that this is one of the things pollsters have fixed about 2016 is they now look specifically to see if their polls have
Michael Franz: A proportionate number of working class white respondents in their poll. And if they don't, they wake them up to match these numbers in the state. And so we should see better results in 2020 than we did in 2016 at the state level because of that.
Michael Franz: Is a huge problem.
Michael Franz: We also have a sponsor based effects. So this is number six sponsor based effects are such that
Michael Franz: Some polling companies have procedures that differ from other polling companies. We call them house effects or sponsor effects.
Michael Franz: And they may be the way they define likely voters, they may have a proprietary way of defining likely voters have more complicated method of doing it.
Michael Franz: They may ask the question in different ways and other pollsters asked the question, they may wait on different variables that other pollsters don't wait on
Michael Franz: And so as a result, they may disproportionately or regularly have effects that are different than other pollsters. Here's an example. Rasmussen
Michael Franz: Their polls are in black compared to all the other polls and what Rasmussen found is that over the course of the campaign.
Michael Franz: It tended to show a very, very, very tight race at the national popular level between Clinton and Trump many of its polls showed Trump winning the popular vote.
Michael Franz: Some polls showed Trump, Clinton winning the popular vote and on average it showed a very, very close race, whereas all the other pollsters tended to show Clinton in the lead.
Michael Franz: So the difference between Rasmussen and all the others as a sponsor based effect. It's a consistent
Michael Franz: Pro Trump bias, if you will, doesn't make it wrong. It just reflects the methodology Rasmussen uses, which we don't know all the differences between other pollsters
Michael Franz: And we need to account for that. And you can actually go see this if you go to 538 and see the approval ratings for Trump over time.
Michael Franz: Look at the Rasmussen polls even since he was inaugurated Rasmussen has tended to find approval ratings for Trump that are higher than a lot of the other polls, sometimes by 10 points. And that's a sponsor effect.
Michael Franz: So we need to be aware of the possibility of these sponsor effects. They're not always easy to recognize, but they are potentially there.
Michael Franz: And then of course the final issue is question wording.
Michael Franz: I asked this question of Bowden students. A few years ago, when we did some polling a boat and students, which we do regularly in my quantitative analysis class and we asked this question, how do you evaluate the statement I feel safe expressing my political views on bowden's campus.
Michael Franz: 37% said they agreed 16% said they strongly agreed 32% said they either disagreed or strongly disagree.
Michael Franz: And you might take those results and say, Wow, a third of Bowden students don't feel safe expressing their views on campus. But what is safe mean
Michael Franz: What I mean by safe. Do I mean physically safe intellectually safe mentally safe. What do I mean it's unclear and it could be unclear to the students taking the pole.
Michael Franz: And so this is a question where I wouldn't say it's a bad question. I would say it's fraught with challenges when I asked it this way. I should be more clear. I want to meet about safe.
Michael Franz: And I shouldn't make inferences about what safe means not knowing how students variable interpreted. My question. And so we need to be a pay attention to question wording and perhaps order where it fits in a survey in addition to all these mechanics of sampling and so forth.
Michael Franz: So what does this all me. Why should we learn to love polls, given all of this. I think we should
Michael Franz: I think we should be skeptical of them. But we shouldn't throw them out. We should use them as important and valuable evidence
Michael Franz: For one polls make the stakes clear when an election is close in the polls show that we know that we need to pay attention to what's happening in that race.
Michael Franz: We're seeing in South Carolina Lindsey Graham is now in a deadlock HEAD TO HEAD MATCHUP WITH Jamie Harrison, we know that from the polls.
Michael Franz: And so as a result, voters in South Carolina are going to pay more attention the candidates are going to spend more money voters are going to get more informed about Harrison's views and grams views.
Michael Franz: And I would say, by and large, the end of the day, voters will know more and make better decisions, given that they pay more attention and they pay more attention because the polls told them to
Michael Franz: We also want to know more than just the election results we want to know why voters make the decisions they do we want to know what relationships are between certain variables and people's voter attitudes and behaviors.
Michael Franz: Hilux talks about this at the end of her chapter or her paper and I think it's right.
Michael Franz: If we just look at the results. We don't know why they happen. We don't know what people were thinking when they showed up at the ballot box or filled out their absentee ballot.
Michael Franz: And so poll results allow us to tease that out by saying, Why did you vote for this candidate or look for relationships between demographic characteristics of voters and their behavior.
Michael Franz: So we should be skeptical of polls. There's no question about that. But, and we should look for all these things that I've highlighted to you today.
Michael Franz: But we shouldn't throw pulls out because of those challenges. We should try to become better consumers of poles. And I think that's the message that I'm trying to convey
Michael Franz: And I want you to look at your polls, click on them dig into them read the methodology of the polls and your race and try to find out what they say about how they operationalize likely voters do they tell you
Michael Franz: Did they wait, do they tell you what was the questions that they asked what wording, did they use their relationships between education race, gender, and the results that they highlight sometimes those are inside the results and not just
Michael Franz: On the top line numbers that nate silver or Real Clear Politics gives us let's dig into those polls and let's learn a little bit more and be critical consumers of them.
Michael Franz: So that's my message and I hope you enjoyed that and learn something and I look forward to talking about polls and digging into some of the results in your polls, so thank you. I hope you had a good break and I will talk to you soon.